Welcome to “Overview of Linux Architecture.”
After watching this video, you will be able to:
List the layers in a Linux system.
Explain the role of each layer in a Linux system.
And describe the Linux filesystem.
The Linux system comprises five distinct layers.
The outermost layer of the Linux architecture is the UI, or user interface, which allows
users to interact with the system using a keyboard or mouse.
The application layer includes system daemons, shells, user apps, and tools used to perform
tasks in a Linux system.
The applications communicate with the operating system to perform tasks. The OS is responsible
for jobs that are vital for system stability such as job scheduling and keeping track of
time.
All Linux operating systems are built on top of the Linux kernel, which performs the most
vital lower-level jobs. The kernel is the core component of the operating system and
is responsible for managing memory, processing, and security.
The kernel interacts with the hardware layer, which includes all the physical or electronic
devices in the computer such as processors, memory modules, input devices, and storage.
The first layer in a Linux system is the user interface.
The UI allows users to perform tasks by controlling applications with the keyboard.
Desktop versions of Linux include a Graphical User Interface, or GUI layer, which is similar
to Microsoft Windows. This extends the UI functionality to other control devices, such
as a mouse.
You might use a Linux machine to:
Use a web browser to send your friend an email.
Or use a music player to listen to your favorite song.
Applications are the software that enables a user to perform a task in a Linux system.
Applications can include the following:
System tools, such as compilers.
Programming languages.
Shells, which are special applications that are often part of the operating system itself.
And user apps, which can be any kind of applications, from browsers, to text editors, to games.
The operating system controls the jobs and programs that are vital to system health and
stability. Its functions also include:
Assigning software to users,
Detecting errors and implementing measures to prevent complete system failures,
And performing file management.
In a Linux system, the operating system is built on top of the Linux kernel, which performs
the most vital operations.
The kernel is the lowest-level software in a Linux system and has complete control of
the system.
It starts as soon as your computer boots and remains in your computer’s memory while
the system is running. It also acts as a bridge between your apps and your machine hardware,
enabling the two to communicate effectively using "system calls."
The kernel has four key jobs:
Memory management,
Process management,
Managing device drivers for proper hardware support,
And assuring the system remains secure
The final layer in the Linux system is the hardware, consisting of the physical or electronic
devices that make up your computer.
This layer can include the following:
The central processing unit, or CPU, which is responsible for executing most calculations.
The random access memory, or RAM, which is a fast storage unit used to hold the temporary
information your applications need to run.
Storage for data that needs to persist when your computer is powered off.
Your computer's screen.
And any USB devices such as a keyboard, mouse, or USB drive.
The Linux filesystem is the collection of files on your machine. It includes the files
needed to run the machine and applications as well as your own files containing your
work.
The top level of the filesystem is the root directory, symbolized by a forward slash (/).
Below this is a tree-like structure of the directories and files in the system.
And the filesystem assigns appropriate access rights to the directories and files.
The very top of the Linux filesystem is the root directory, which contains many other
directories and files.
One of the key directories is /bin, which contains user binary files. Binary files contain
the code your machine reads to run programs and execute commands.
It’s called "slash bin" to signify that it exists directly below the root directory.
Other key directories include /usr, which contains user programs,
/home, which is your personal working directory where you should store all your personal files,
/boot, which contains your system boot files, the instructions vital for system startup,
and /media, which contains files related to temporary media such as CD or USB drives that
are connected to the system.
There are several other directories in the root directory, but you will not need to access
them during this course.
All the files and directories in a Linux system are organized into one of these designated
folders, depending on the purpose of the file or directory.
In this video, you learned that:
A Linux system consists of five key layers.
The user interface is the layer that enables the user to interact with applications using
control devices​.
Applications enable users to perform certain tasks within the system.
The operating system runs on top of the Linux kernel and is vital for system health and
stability.
The kernel is the lowest-level software and enables applications to interact with your
hardware.
Hardware includes all the physical or electronic components of your PC.
And the Linux filesystem is a tree-like structure consisting of all directories and
files on the system.