Welcome to Introduction to Linux and Unix.
After watching this video, you will be able to:
Explain what an operating system, or OS, is
Describe the origins of Linux and Unix.
And list some of the features of Linux and Unix.
So, what is an operating system?
It is software that:
Manages computer hardware and resources
And allows interaction with hardware to perform useful tasks.
So, what is Unix?
It’s a family of operating systems
Some popular Unix-based operating systems include:
Oracle Solaris (and Open Solaris)
FreeBSD
HP-UX
IBM AIX
And Apple macOS, which is one of the most popular desktop operating systems today.
In the 1960s, the original Unix OS was created at AT&T Bell Labs. However, like many operating
systems at the time, it was made for a specific hardware system, in this case, the PDP-7 computer.
In the 1970s, the Unix OS was rewritten in C, distinguishing itself from other systems
and making it portable to many hardware architectures.
And then in the late 1970s, UC Berkley developed Berkley Software Distribution (or BSD), an
add-on to Unix providing additional software and capabilities. The famous macOS was later
derived from BSD.
So, what is Linux?
Linux is a family of Unix-like operating systems. However, when referring to Linux, people are
usually talking about a specific distribution or flavor.
And Linux was developed as an effort to create a free, open source version of the Unix OS.
Key Linux features include the following:
Linux is free and open source, which means anyone can view the source code.
With so many eyes on the source code, Linux has become the most secure OS over the years.
It’s multi-user. Linux is designed to support multiple users accessing the system simultaneously.
It supports multitasking, running multiple jobs and applications at the same time
And it’s portable. Linux has been ported to run on many different types of devices
and hardware platforms from desktops to servers to appliances.
How did Linux start?
In the 1980s, GNU was developed at MIT. GNU stands for “GNU’s not Unix” and was
made as a free, open source set of the existing Unix system tools.
And in 1991, Linus Torvalds developed a free, open source version of the Unix kernel called
Linux. The kernel is the core component of an OS that enables components to communicate
with the machine’s hardware.
Here is Linus Torvalds’ famous email where he shared his progress making his own open-source
Unix-Like Kernel.
He references minix, which was another Unix-like kernel at the time.
Soon after, in 1992, the potential of unifying GNU and the Linux kernel was realized as popular
Linux operating systems began to appear.
And in 1996, a computer scientist named Larry Ewing created ”Tux” the penguin, which
was later adopted by Linus Torvalds as the official Linux mascot.
Today, the BSD-based macOS runs on millions of devices across the world.
Billions of Linux instances run on servers, serving us the modern web.
And especially among developers, modern Linux operating systems such as Ubuntu are beginning
to gain popularity in the PC space.
What are the most common use cases for Linux today?
First, it’s used in billions of smartphones around the world via the Android operating
system, which uses a Linux-based kernel.
Linux is also widely used in supercomputers where many Linux-powered servers are clustered
together for high-performance computing applications.
Enterprise and cloud data centers also use Linux over millions of servers running all
kinds of applications, web servers, databases, and so on.
And finally, versions of Linux can be easily used as your PC’s operating system. Many
people install Linux today as a learning experience or as their daily driver.
In this video, you learned that:
Unix is a family of operating systems dating from the 1960s.
Linux was originally developed in the 1980s as a free, open-source alternative to Unix.
Linux is multi-user, portable, and supports multitasking.
And Linux is widely used today in mobile devices, supercomputers, data centers, and cloud servers.