Welcome to “File and Directory Navigation Commands.”
In this video, you will learn how to:
Use the “list” command to list a directory’s contents
Navigate between different directories with the “change directory” command
Explain relative and absolute paths, and
Find files with the “find” command
The ls or “list” command will list the files and directories within a directory.
If you enter “ls” in your home directory, you will see all the files and directories
that your home directory contains.
You can also pass a directory name, such as “Downloads,” as a parameter to ls,
which will list the contents of your Downloads folder.
The ls command also supports options that will list additional information.
Suppose you’re currently working in your documents folder, and you want more information
about the files within the directory.
You can use the ls command with the -l option, which will show child
files and directories in a longer, more detailed format.
You can see that the terminal has listed all the child files, directories, and additional
details, such as permissions, last-modified date, and owner.
At times, you may need to know which directory you’re currently working in.
In these cases, you can use the “print working directory” command to get your current working
directory.
Enter "pwd" into the command line to use the command.
Here you can see that you’re currently working in your home directory, “/Users/me.”
If you want to change your current working directory, you can use the “change directory”
command. The “change directory,” or cd command, is used to change the directory
you are working in.
Suppose you’re in your home directory and wish to move to a subdirectory within it,
such as the Documents folder.
Simply enter “cd Documents” to change your working directory.
Now, if you enter “pwd,”
you can see that you’re now working in your Documents subdirectory.
The cd command enables you to change directories with either a relative or an absolute
path.
Let’s say you’re in a “Notes” folder within your “Documents” directory tree.
To get to the parent directory relative to your current folder, enter the cd command
with the relative path symbol “..” as its argument.
Now your working directory is “Math,” the immediate parent directory of your “Notes”
folder.
If you want to navigate directly to your home folder, use the tilde symbol with the
cd command.
This will take you to your home folder. In this case, the tilde symbol represents an
absolute path to home.
Finally, you can also provide a full path to a directory. Here you are referring to
the absolute pathname for the original “Notes” directory.
As expected, this command will take you back to the “Notes” folder where you started.
Lastly, the “find” command is a powerful tool that will return the path to every file
that matches a user-specified criterion.
Suppose your “Documents” folder has a file structure as shown, two subfolders, each
containing a few files.
Let’s say you’re working in your “Documents” folder and want to find the paths of all files
named “a.txt” within your working directory.
To do so, type “find . -name ‘a.txt’.”
The “.” argument means “search within here,” so the command will only search within
your current working directory.
To perform a case-insensitive version of your search, you can use the “-iname”
option instead.
You’ll see that you find the same file, plus another file with the same name but with
an uppercase “A.”
In this video, you learned that:
The ls command lists all files and directories contained within a specified directory
tree
The cd command is used to navigate between directories
Relative paths are relative to your current working directory, while absolute paths stand
independently
The find command is used to find files in your directories